Decisions (#3514)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/array.md

## Problem

Currently it is inefficient to detect the length of an array and
it is impossible to know if a key (without subkeys) should be
an array or not.

## Constraints

- None

## Assumptions

- Meta-data arrays simply work by convention as they are not serialized in special ways nor they get validated.
  The convention will be the same but without any metadata marker.

## Considered Alternatives

- `###empty_array` as in `yajl`, problem: does not allow efficient access of first element
- store length (and not last element), problem: needs prepending of `#_...`
- store element after last element (C++-Style), would not fit nicely with key/value
- use value and not the metadata `array`, problem: is ambiguous

> - use metadata on all children

Reviewer: Continuation from https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/issues/3223#issuecomment-712661004
---

> Yes, spec would really need to understand the semantics of the metadata, like arrays. So it would check all namespaces how the array actually looks like, and then add the proper metadata array.

I still don't understand how that would work. Without any metadata in `user:/` there can be no array elements in `user:/` according to the current definition of "array element".

For example, the `spec` plugin would find `spec:/myarray` with an `array` metadata. It would therefore have to validate this array. It then does a lookup on `/myarray` to find the actual array size. But that will never return any `array` metadata, if the storage format doesn't support metadata. Therefore `spec` always assumes `/myarray` should be of the default size defined in `spec:/myarray`.

Author: The other way round: it would add the size 692ce07d4be4be3fd4961aedaa65862f25c2f91a

Reviewer: Relying on the `spec` for all of this will also cause some problems with plugin ordering.

We need to run `spec` first to add the correct size, but we need to run it last to validate against broken arrays. Actually, we also need to run it between all other plugins for the validation. Otherwise plugins cannot make the assumption that there are no broken arrays.

  array = #5
```

> To lookup an array, first do `ksLookup(ks,"/myarray")` on the parent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To lookup an array, first do `ksLookupByName (ks, "/myarray", 0)` on the parent.
```

> With the last index you get from its metadata `array`, iterate over the children.

Reviewer: Using the `array` metadata on the parent can actually cause inconsistent data. Only one file, i.e. one mountpoint, can be read atomically. But the parent key could be in a different mountpoint (a weird setup, but possible)

Author: I would not call it inconsistent, it might only wrongly turn from array to non-array.

Reviewer: What would you call inconsistent, if not a completely wrong interpretation of the config?

Just think about `spec`. The `array` metadata makes a huge difference to what happens and might even cause some errors.

Author: Of course it is inconsistent on the level of configuration but this it would be either way if one mountpoint gets written and the other does not. Btw. in the case of a computer crash the non-renamed files would still be lying there, so the admin can make the configuration consistent again.

But what I meant is that it is consistent from the point of view of the array:

- if the array metadata is there, it is an array
- if the array metadata is not there, it is not an array

What we did not yet decide is what should happen with an array where the children have keys which are not in `#...` syntax. Basically, we could normalize it during `kdbGet` (if we decide to do something like #3497).

Reviewer: > Of course it is inconsistent on the level of configuration but this it would be either way if one mountpoint gets written and the other does not. Btw. in the case of a computer crash the non-renamed files would still be lying there, so the admin can make the configuration consistent again.

I wasn't talking about outright crashes. I was just thinking about a race condition. There could be two processes accessing the KDB. Process A wants to update both mountpoints, but process B reads them when only one of the two mountpoints has been updated.

> But what I meant is that it is consistent from the point of view of the array:

What if the array size was changed. There could be missing array elements now, which might cause unexpected errors.

> What we did not yet decide is what should happen with an array where the children have keys which are not in #... syntax. Basically, we could normalize it during kdbGet

What do you mean by "normalize"?

Author: > Process A wants to update both mountpoints, but process B reads them when only one of the two mountpoints has been updated.

There are mechanisms in resolver to prevent this (checking if the file was tempted with before renaming). And Elektra also locks, so if both processes use Elektra they should be safe from this.

> What if the array size was changed. There could be missing array elements now, which might cause unexpected errors.

All of this should be caught by `spec` in kdbGet.

> What do you mean by "normalize"?

The `spec` plugin could even rewrite:
```
user:/myarray
user:/myarray/a
user:/myarray/b
user:/myarray/c
```

to:

```
user:/myarray      # array=#2
user:/myarray/#0
user:/myarray/#1
user:/myarray/#2
```

Reviewer: > The spec plugin could even rewrite: [...]

Are you serious?? That's so much black magic that even sys-admin-wizards would be confused for days why the application receives a config completely different from the one in the file....

Reviewer 2: > And Elektra also locks, so if both processes use Elektra they should be safe from this.

Yes, but [afaik](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/locking.html) this can not be done reliably and portably.

Author: > Are you serious??

Actually it is current behavior for some storage plugins, e.g. fstab iirc.

> That's so much black magic that even sys-admin-wizards would be confused for days why the application receives a config completely different from the one in the file....

In the file is always the correct (it always contains an array), it is only about:

```
kdb set user:/myarray/zzz sthg
kdb get user:/myarray/zzz
#RET: 2
#> key not found
kdb get user:/myarray/#3
#> sthg
```

So actually it is currently a workaround for the missing array functionality in `kdb` (for appending to arrays).

I don't say I like it, but it is also not soo bad and quite practical (at least as long we do not have proper tooling support for handling arrays).

Reviewer: > Actually it is current behavior for some storage plugins, e.g. fstab iirc.

Yes, a specialised storage plugin like `fstab` could do such things, but not `spec`. If the user chooses `fstab` they explicitly opt in to such behaviour, but `spec` should be the default.

> The file is always the correct (it always contains an array), it is "only" about: [...] not soo bad and quite practical

I'm sorry, I cannot accept that. If that is actually your opinion, I think it would best for me to stop working on Elektra, because we will never agree on anything.

That

```
kdb set user:/myarray/zzz sthg
kdb get user:/myarray/zzz
#RET: 2
#> key not found
```

should **NEVER EVER EVER** happen. That is the **WORST BUG** that Elektra could possible have. It failed at its single most important job: Storing a value for a key.

Author: :laughing: Of course it is a bug: the validation is missing. But I would not call it the worst bug, e.g. missing keys in the multifile resolver are definitely worse (`kdb set` which goes to nirvana.)

Reviewer: IMO `kdb set` changing a different key than stated without any indication that this happend is worse than it simply doing nothing. In your example the key `user:/myarray/#3` may have contained important stuff that is now gone, because `kdb set` did something very unexpected.

It's like saying:

It's not so bad that `echo "test" > /etc/useless_file` wrote to `/etc/passwd` instead, at least it didn't do nothing.

Author: :laughing: Of course this is impossible, if `#3` would exist, it would have been called `#4`. But your whole argumentation basically points that you actually do **not** expect it to be an array but rather a convention of names. Otherwise you would not be **so** repulsive to such ideas, e.g. Python also uses out-of-bound index for something else (e.g. -1 for the last entry). But I agree that all of this is in the best case a workaround, what we actually want is a nice interface to add entries to arrays.

Reviewer: > Of course this is impossible, if `#3` would exist, it would have been called `#4`

That doesn't seem much better. Okay, we don't loose values, but we still do something quite unexpected.

> But your whole argumentation basically points that you actually do not expect it to be an array but rather a convention of names. Otherwise you would not be so repulsive to such ideas, e.g. Python also uses out-of-bound index for something else (e.g. -1 for the last entry).

No, I actually want it to be arrays. The Python thing is different, `-1` is still a number and Python also doesn't accept all numbers as indices for every array. Only `n,...,n-1` are allowed for an array of length `n`. You can only read from or write to these indices. The only difference between Python and e.g. Java is that each array element has 2 indices (on positive and on negative).

> But I agree that all of this is in the best case a workaround, what we actually want is a nice interface to add entries to arrays.

Good then, we _do_ agree. :)

A cascading lookup on every individual child is also needed to make sure that overrides on individual

> elements are respected.

Reviewer: A helper function for this might be useful. This kind of lookup is sadly also quite expensive.

Author: > A helper function for this might be useful.

Yes, definitely. Or bindings you probably even want that you can access it as an array of the programming language.

> This kind of lookup is sadly also quite expensive.

I never saw any application where more than 3% was spent on lookup (even with several fallbacks/overrides).

Did you implement this kind of lookup already in the high-level API?

Reviewer: > I never saw any application where more than 10% was spent on lookup (even with several fallbacks/overrides).

10% of what?

It's also not a good idea to measure this in percentages. Of course optimizations should be performed on the bottlenecks (right now probably some part of `kdbGet`/`kdbSet`). But if we have another reason to change arrays, improving performance a long the way would still be nice.

BTW the additional lookup also has additional cost in terms of developer time and code complexity. That could also be called expensive.

> Did you implement this kind of lookup already in the high-level API?

The high-level API does some handling of `array` metadata. It will have to be seen, if that turns out to be correct or not, once this decision is decided.

Author: >  10% of what?

E.g. CPU time. But actually of nearly any metric I can think of, as lookup e.g. has only a few simple loops and does only one allocation :wink:

> It's also not a good idea to measure this in percentages.

It is even a worse idea to speculate without any measurement.

> BTW the additional lookup also has additional cost in terms of developer time and code complexity. That could also be called expensive.

The sword has two edges: that every key the application wants to use needs a lookup is a totally simple rule, easy to follow and provides consistent behavior.

Author: I added this proposal now here 16fe87f7687a0f82dae2b757cf405f1d8b03bc33

Reviewer: > It is even a worse idea to speculate without any measurement.

There is no need for measurement to confirm that fewer lookups is faster. It might not be noticeable, but like I said performance is not my primary goal but just a side effect.

> has only a few simple loops and does only one allocation 

`ksLookup` can be recursive and use more than one allocation. It all depends on what lookup you are doing.

> every key the application wants to use needs a lookup is a totally simple rule

For applications this is fine, but I'm more concerned about plugins and libraries that need to deal with arrays. They also need to do lookups when a simple iteration over a `KeySet` may have been enough. In such a case the code is suddenly a lot more complicated.

Author: > ksLookup can be recursive and use more than one allocation.

Which allocation do you mean? I mean the one allocation of the lookup key (which can even be avoided by ksLookupByName). So recursive calls do not change the number of this allocation, as the allocation happened outside.

> They also need to do lookups when a simple iteration over a KeySet may have been enough.

When they are not concerned about other namespaces, the simple iteration should be enough anyway.

Reviewer: > Which allocation do you mean?

There are many `keySetNamespace` calls in the helper functions (e.g. `elektraLookupByCascading`). All of these result in allocations. Total memory use will be pretty constant, but there could still be a lot of `realloc`.

There is also `elektraLookupBySpecLinks` which has a `keyNew`.

For example:

```

> spec/myarray    # <- contains the specification for the array
> spec/myarray/#  # <- contains the specification for the array elements
> 
> dir/myarray/#0  # <- not an array, just an override for user/myarray/#
> 
> user/myarray    # <- with metadata array=#0, this would be the array we get
> user/myarray/#0
> 
> system/myarray  # <- not found in cascading lookup, as user/myarray exists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spec:/myarray    # <- contains the specification for the array
spec:/myarray/#  # <- contains the specification for the array elements

dir:/myarray/#0  # <- not an array, just an override for user:/myarray/#

user:/myarray    # <- with metadata array=#0, this would be the array we get
user:/myarray/#0

system:/myarray  # <- not found in cascading lookup, as user:/myarray exists
```

Please use the new notation as far as possible, to avoid additional work in #3447.

> ```

Reviewer: This example is quite confusing and took me a while to understand. It might be better to first write down what is in the KDB and then explain step by step what is found by which lookup.

One problem I have with the whole thing is: `dir:/myarray/#0` is only an array as long as `user:/myarray` exists. If `user:/myarray` is deleted, `dir:/myarray/#0` suddenly isn't an array element any more.

IMO `dir:/myarray/#0` should only be an array element, if `dir:/myarray` has metadata `array = #0` (or bigger index). Alternatively, we could say arrays must always be specified in `spec:/`.

Author: > It might be better to first write down what is in the KDB and then explain step by step what is found by which lookup.

Yes, actually a whole tutorial on arrays is needed.

> IMO dir:/myarray/#0 should only be an array element, if dir:/myarray has metadata array = #0 (or bigger index).

Yes, I agree and you understood correctly.

Is this already implemented in the high-level API?

> 

Reviewer: I noticed something I really don't like about this `array` concept: A `user:/` key can change the semantics of a (different) `system:/` key.

At the system level we have these keys:
```
system:/myarray              ; array=#0
system:/myarray/#0 = 8
system:/myarray/#1 = 12
```
That means for `root` and any other user `system:/myarray/#1` is not an array element.

But if some user adds this key:
```
user:/myarray                ; array=#1
```
Suddenly `system:/myarray/#1` is an array element, but only for this user. That goes against the idea that `system:/` keys are system-wide.

We don't have to enforce this (although `spec` might be able to), but we should at least formulate some rules against this.

Author: I clarified in accc55f7673b92b12f676ed042a187354c40955f

The first question is if this is legal to have `array=#0` if there are actually two array entries. Maybe this should already be rejected.

And in general: system is not the namespace to **enforce** system configuration but `spec` is. So yes, a user can put a non-array key somewhere which is an array in system.

Reviewer: > if this is legal to have `array=#0` if there are actually two array entries.

By the current definition, the second entry (`system:/myarray/#1`) would _not_ be an array entry. Its just another key that looks like an array entry by coincidence. This exactly what I don't like about `#...` is only an array entry, if `array` on the parent says so.

> So yes, a user can put a non-array key somewhere which is an array in system.

First, the `spec` plugin would actually prevent that. Second, that is not the problem, here. Here a user turns a non-array key into an array key. So its exactly the other way around...
